[DOCS-8843] CNM Guide Detecting application availability using network insights (#26686)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/network_monitoring/cloud_network_monitoring/guide/detecting_application_availability.md

---
title: Detecting Application Availability using Network Insights
description: Use CNM to detect application availability
further_reading:
    - link: 'https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/apm-cnm-application-debugging/'
      tag: 'Blog'
      text: 'Debug application issues with APM and Cloud Network Monitoring'
    - link: 'https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/cnm-best-practices/'
      tag: 'Blog'
      text: 'Best practices for getting started with Datadog Cloud Network Monitoring'
    - link: 'https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/monitor-containers-with-cnm/'
      tag: 'Blog'
      text: 'How to monitor containerized and service-meshed network communication with Datadog CNM'     
---

## Overview

> Modern applications are built in a modular distributed manner with microservices and stateless design principles. Networking connects the distributed components of an application, ensuring a seamless user and application experience. By capturing, analyzing, and correlating network metrics such as latency, packet loss, and throughput across different applications and services, Datadog's Cloud Network Monitoring (CNM) provides actionable insights for application developers and SRE teams.

Author: I do agree, this was a suggestion from the PSA, but I think I'm going to revert it to the previous copy :)

## Discovery of services and connectivity

CNM is designed to track traffic between entities, determine which resources are communicating, and report their health status.

> To examine the a basic traffic flow between entities, use the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To examine the a basic traffic flow between entities, take the following steps:
```

1. On the [Network Analytics page][1], set your **View clients as** and **View servers as** dropdown filters to group by `service` tags to examine a service-to-service flow, and observe the basic traffic unit: a source IP communicating over a port to a destination IP on a port.

   {{< img src="network_performance_monitoring/guide/detecting_network_insights/cnm_service_service.png" alt="CNM analytics page, grouping by service to service with Client and Server IP highlighted">}}

>    Each row aggregates 5 minutes worth of connections. While you might recognize some IPs as specific addresses or hosts depending on your network familiarity, this becomes challenging with larger, more complex networks. Therefore, the most meaningful aggregation level is rolling up the host or container associated with these IPs to tags in Datadog, such as `service`, `availability zone`, `pod`, and so on.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what "this" specifically means in this sentence? I'm also confused because I don't see the tags you're talking about in the screenshot, and I'm not sure what "rolling up" is supposed to mean.

```suggestion
   Each row aggregates 5 minutes' worth of connections. While you might recognize some IPs as specific addresses or hosts, depending on your network familiarity, this becomes challenging with larger, more complex networks. Therefore, the most meaningful aggregation level is rolling up the host or container associated with these IPs to tags in Datadog, such as `service`, `availability zone`, `pod`, and so on.
```

> 2. For example, to view the network traffic for all of your `orders-sqlserver*` pods by host and availability zone, use the following filters to narrow down your search results:

Reviewer 2: The "for example" here changes the premise of the numbered list - it started out as a procedure to presumably examine any basic traffic flow, but now it's abruptly turned into a hypothetical. These two purposes are different enough that I wouldn't put them in the same list, or I'd be upfront about this being an example from the beginning.

Alternatively, if the point of this step is *actually* narrowing down search results, rather than the example, you could write:
```suggestion
2. Narrow down your search results using filters. For example, to view the network traffic for all of your `orders-sqlserver*` pods by host and availability zone, use the `client_pod_name:orders-sqlserver*` filter:
```

   {{< img src="network_performance_monitoring/guide/detecting_network_insights/cnm_host_az.png" alt="CNM analytics page, grouping by host and availability zone for specific client pod name">}}

>    This initial step allows you to begin monitoring your most complex networks and start gaining insights between endpoints in your environment, including VMs, containers, services, cloud regions, datacenters, and more.

Reviewer 2: I was a bit confused at seeing "this initial step" to refer to step 2. It would make sense if it referred to just step 1, or if it were indented all the way to the left so that it didn't look like it was still part of step 2. Maybe the second is closer to the intent here?

> ### Service-to-Service dependency tracking

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Service-to-service dependency tracking
```

Reviewer 2: Same comment as above about nouns and verbs - I think this could indicate more clearly that it's a place to learn about how to perform this kind of tracking!

CNM tracks dependencies between services, which is essential for ensuring system performance. It helps verify important connections and highlights traffic volumes, ensuring all critical dependencies are operational.

For example, a possible cause of service latency could be too much traffic being directed to a destination endpoint, overwhelming its ability to handle incoming requests effectively.

> To analyze the cause of service latency, use the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To analyze the cause of service latency, take the following steps:
```

1. On the [Network Analytics][1] page, aggregate traffic by `service`, and filter for the cloud region where you may be noticing alerts or service latency. This view displays all service-to-service dependency paths within that region. 

2. Sort the dependency table based on retransmits or latency, to identify connections with the most significant performance degradation. For instance, if you notice an unusually high number of TCP established connections alongside spikes in retransmits and latency, it may indicate that the source is overwhelming the destination's infrastructure with requests.

   {{< img src="network_performance_monitoring/guide/detecting_network_insights/cnm_service_region_retransmits.png" alt="CNM analytics page, grouping by service and region for specific cloud region">}}

> 3. Click into one of the traffic paths on this page to open the side panel. This provides more detailed telemetry to help you further debug your network dependencies. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Click one of the traffic paths on this page to open the side panel. The side panel provides more detailed telemetry to help you further debug your network dependencies. 
```

> 4. While on the side panel view, check the Flows tab to determine if the communication protocol is TCP or UDP, and review metrics like RTT, Jitter, and packets sent and received to help identify the cause of a high retransmit count.

Reviewer 2: Slight rephrasing to make a clearer distinction between the procedure and the example:

```suggestion
4. While on the side panel view, check the **Flows** tab to determine if the communication protocol is TCP or UDP, and review metrics like RTT, Jitter, and packets sent and received. If you're investigating a high retransmit count, this information can help you identify the cause.
```

   {{< img src="network_performance_monitoring/guide/detecting_network_insights/cnm_sidepanel_flows.png" alt="Side panel of a traffic flow, highlighting the Flows tab">}}

> ## Visibility into network traffic 

Reviewer 2: Same note as above about making this a verb phrase, so the user can have a clearer relationship to this useful information :)

Datadog CNM consolidates relevant distributed traces, logs, and infrastructure data into a single view, allowing you to identify and trace issues back to the originating request from an application.

> In the example below, check the Traces tab under Network Analytics to view distributed traces of requests between source and destination endpoints, which can help you pinpoint where application-level errors occur.

Reviewer 2: This seems like a step. It can be a bit jarring to receive information like a description of a clickable screen element before you have the context required to know where that element is. Would it be possible to incorporate it into the procedure?

```suggestion
In the example below, check the **Traces** tab under Network Analytics to view distributed traces of requests between source and destination endpoints, which can help you pinpoint where application-level errors occur.
```

> To identify if an issue is an Application or Network issue, you can use the following steps:

Reviewer 2: Should "Application" and "Network" be capitalized here?

> To identify if an issue is an application or network issue, you can use the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To identify if an issue is an application or network issue, take can use the following steps:
```

> 1. Navigate to [Infrastructure > Cloud Network > Analytics][1].  
> 2. In the Summary graphs, click a line of communication that has a lot of volume and high RTT time:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to [**Infrastructure** > **Cloud Network** > **Analytics**][1].  
2. In the **Summary** graphs, click a line of communication that has a lot of volume and high RTT time:
```

   {{< img src="network_performance_monitoring/guide/detecting_network_insights/cnm_isolate_series.png" alt="CNM analytics page, clicking on a path with high RTT Time">}}

> 3. Click **Isolate this series**  

Reviewer 2: Could probably incorporate this step into the previous one?

> 4. Click into this path and click on the Flows tab to observe RTT time:

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what "this path" is - the line of communication from step 2?
```suggestion
4. Click this path, then click the **Flows** tab to observe RTT time:
```

Reviewer 2: I think this opens a page or a side panel? Future steps talk about "this page," and I think to clarify expectations, it might be worth describing what happens as a result of clicking the path if it opens something new.

   {{< img src="network_performance_monitoring/guide/detecting_network_insights/cnm_sidepanel_rtt.png" alt="CNM sidepanel, highlighting the RTT time column">}}

> 5. On this page, CNM correlates network metric round-trip time (RTT) with application request latency, to help us identify if the issue is a network or application issue. In this particular example, observe that the RTT time is slightly high but has come down over time and needs to be investigated further.  

Reviewer 2: Same comment as before, where I struggle to see this as a step. I think it could be another paragraph under the above step, which had a clearer action.

> 6. On this same page, click the Traces tab and investigate the Duration column: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. On this same page, click the **Traces** tab and investigate the **Duration** column: 
```

   {{< img src="network_performance_monitoring/guide/detecting_network_insights/cnm_traces_duration.png" alt="CNM sidepanel, highlighting the Traces tab and duration column">}}

>    Observe that although network latency (RTT) is high, the application request latency (Duration) is normal, so in this case, the issue is likely network-related, and there's no need to investigate the app code. 
> 
>    Conversely, *if network latency is stable but application latency (Duration) is high*, the problem likely stems from the app, and you can explore code-level traces by clicking on one of the service paths in the Traces tab to find the root cause, which takes you to the APM flame graph relative to this service:

Reviewer 2: This is clear example stuff that I don't think really belongs in a procedure. It's good information, though!

I also wonder if you could make the connections between network latency and RTT, and application request latency and duration, higher up in the topic?

```suggestion
   Observe that although network latency (RTT) is high, the application request latency (Duration) is normal, so in this case, the issue is likely network-related, and there's no need to investigate the app code. 

   Conversely, *if network latency is stable but application latency (Duration) is high*, the problem likely stems from the app, and you can explore code-level traces by clicking on one of the service paths in the **Traces** tab to find the root cause, which takes you to the APM flame graph relative to this service:
```

   {{< img src="network_performance_monitoring/guide/detecting_network_insights/cnm_apm_traces.png" alt="APM flame graph screenshot after clicking on a service from the CNM sidepanel traces tab">}}

> ### Network map

Reviewer 2: I noticed that the phrase "network map" is inconsistently capitalized in this section - I'd choose one way and stick with it throughout. (If all else is equal, I prefer using sentence case by default; it makes your life a lot easier!)

Author: ah yes good catch it should be capitalized.

> The [Network map][2] in Datadog provides a visual representation of your network topology, helping identify partitions, dependencies, and bottlenecks. It consolidates network data into a directional map, making it easier to isolate problematic areas. Additionally, it visualizes network traffic between any tagged object in your environment, from `services` to `pods` to cloud regions.

Reviewer 2: Should `cloud regions` be formatted in monospace too? Do "services" and "pods" need to be monospaced at all? Later on, it looks like at least "pods" lose the formatting, so maybe it can be safely removed here too.

Author: when we referring to a tag such as a `service` tag or `pod` tag it does need monospace, so yes cloud regions should have that too thanks for the catch!

> For complex networks in large containerized environments, Datadog's [Network Map][3] simplifies your troubleshooting by using directional arrows, or edges, to visualize real-time traffic flows between containers, pods, and deployments, even as containers change. This allows you to spot inefficiencies and misconfigurations. For example, the map can reveal if Kubernetes pods within the same cluster are communicating through an ingress controller, rather than directly to each other, indicating misconfiguration that can cause increased latency.  

Reviewer 2: Could you make it clearer that this link stays within the docs? Just by looking at this and the paragraph above it, I couldn't tell that the above link goes to the network map in the Datadog dashboard, but that this doesn't do the same.

```suggestion
For complex networks in large containerized environments, Datadog's [Network Map][3] simplifies your troubleshooting by using directional arrows, or edges, to visualize real-time traffic flows between containers, pods, and deployments, even as containers change. This allows you to spot inefficiencies and misconfigurations. For example, the map can reveal if Kubernetes pods within the same cluster are communicating through an ingress controller, rather than directly to each other, indicating a misconfiguration that can cause increased latency.  
```

To identify if there might be a communication problem with your Kubernetes pods and their underlying services, perform the following steps:

> 1. On the [Network Map][2], set the **View** drop down to `pod_name`, the **By** drop down to "Client Availability Zone", and set the **Metric** to "Volume Sent" (this is the [metric][6] you want your edges to represent):

Reviewer 2: Notice that "dropdown" is one word earlier in this topic. 
```suggestion
1. On the [Network Map][2], set the **View** dropdown to `pod_name`, the **By** dropdown to "Client Availability Zone", and set the **Metric** dropdown to "Volume Sent" (this is the [metric][6] you want your edges to represent):
```

   {{< img src="network_performance_monitoring/guide/detecting_network_insights/cnm_network_map.png" alt="CNM Network Map page showing a clustering example">}}

2. Hover over a node to observe the edges (or directional arrows) to visualize the traffic flow between clusters and availability zones. In this particular example, observe there are edges between all of your pods. If no edges are present, it could represent a misconfiguration issue.

   {{< img src="network_performance_monitoring/guide/detecting_network_insights/cnm_network_map_node.png" alt="CNM Network Map page showing a clustering example, highlighting a specific node">}}

> 3. The edge thickness is associated with the metric chosen from the drop down. In this particular example, a thicker edge is associated with the metric `volume sent`. Optionally, you can also navigate directly back to the [Network Analytics][1] page by clicking on the dotted edge directly to investigate the network connections further.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't seem like a step either. Maybe a nested list of bullet points for the user to observe would be more appropriate?

   {{< img src="network_performance_monitoring/guide/detecting_network_insights/cnm_network_map_thicker_edge.png" alt="CNM Network Map page showing a clustering example, highlighting a thicker edge">}}

### Service mesh

> Services meshes like [Istio][4] help manage microservice communication but add complexity to monitoring by introducing layers of abstraction. Datadog CNM simplifies this by visualizing traffic flows across Istio-managed networks and providing full visibility into the Istio environment. Datadog monitors key metrics like bandwidth and request performance, logs control plane health, and traces application requests across the mesh.

Reviewer 2: Can you be more specific about what "this" means here?

```suggestion
Service meshes like [Istio][4] help manage microservice communication, but add complexity to monitoring by introducing layers of abstraction. Datadog CNM simplifies this by visualizing traffic flows across Istio-managed networks and providing full visibility into the Istio environment. Datadog monitors key metrics like bandwidth and request performance, logs control plane health, and traces application requests across the mesh.
```
